---
title: IRC on RPi
date: 2015-07-04T23:42:09-05:00
author: Josh Habdas
description: Learn to use IRC on your Raspberry Pi. Tutorial and IRC client cheat sheet.
layout: post
permalink: /irc-on-rpi/
comments: true
categories: [tutorials]
tags: [iot, microcontrollers, irc, rpi]
---

I'm learning how to run IRC on my Raspberry Pi so I can have a distraction in my lab. The setup I've got is pretty spartan, but that's what I was going for on a $35 Linux box running off an 8GB SD card. You can do this too! It's *simple* and *fun*. Why not give it a shot?

# Requirements

- Raspberry Pi with Raspbian or similar installed
- Booted into a terminal window
- With network connectivity

# Installing Irssi

*Irssi is an IRC client program for Linux, FreeBSD, Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows. It was originally written by Timo Sirainen, and released under the terms of the GNU General Public License in January 1999.*

To install it on the RPi type the following in the terminal then press `Enter`:

    sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get install irssi # update to ensure freshness

Fire up the client with the `irssi` command.

Once connected, join a server and a channel to get connected with chat groups organized around various topics of interest. Here's an [Irssi cheat sheet](https://gist.github.com/jhabdas/4702e1353d08e70bfcad) to get you going.

# Staying connected

The first thing I noticed using Irssi was I'd have to `/exit` the Irssi program to get back to my terminal session, causing the IRC connection to drop. To stay connected to IRC while using your RPi you can use a program like [tmux](https://tmux.github.io) or [GNU Screen](https://www.gnu.org/software/screen/).

To install tmux on the Pi type the following in the terminal then press `Enter`:

    sudo apt-get install tmux -y # use -y to auto-accept any interactive prompts

If you're running Raspbian on the Pi, you can alternatively switch between terminal windows using `Alt` and the arrow keys and starting a separate terminal window and session, achieving a similar effect.

# Acknowledgments

This post and the cheat sheet were inspired by [Using Raspberry Pi as IRC Client](http://internetofthings-pune.blogspot.com/2013/10/using-raspberry-pi-as-irc-client.html) from the IoT Pune Community Blog.
